Just like Nietzsche's other books, this one takes some time to understand as well. It needs constant rereadings of the same paragraph and a whole lot of thinking. That is what makes it both special and hard to read. But it's worth every bit of effort.

# Quotes

Here are some of the amazing segments of this great book. Taken from the translation by Maudemarie Clark and Alan J. Swensen.

## Preface / 1

We are unknown to ourselves, we knowers: and for a good reason. We have never sought ourselves—how then should it happen that we find ourselves one day? It has rightly been said: “where your treasure is, there will your heart be also”; our treasure is where the beehives of our knowledge stand. We are forever underway toward them, as born winged animals and honey-gatherers of the spirit, concerned with all our heart about only one thing—“bringing home” something. As for the rest of life, the so-called “experiences”—who of us even has enough seriousness for them? Or enough time? In such matters I’m afraid we were never really “with it”: we just don’t have our heart there—or even our ear! Rather, much as a divinely distracted, self-absorbed person into whose ear the bell has just boomed its twelve strokes of noon suddenly awakens and wonders, “what did it actually toll just now?” so we rub our ears afterwards and ask, completely amazed, completely disconcerted, “what did we actually experience just now?” still more: “who are we actually?” and count up, afterwards, as stated, all twelve quavering bellstrokes of our experience, of our life, of our being—alas! and miscount in the process … We remain of necessity strangers to ourselves, we do not understand ourselves, we must mistake ourselves, for us the maxim reads to all eternity: “each is furthest from himself,”—with respect to ourselves we are not “knowers” …

## First Treatise / 14

Would anyone like to go down and take a little look into the secret of how they fabricate ideals on earth? Who has the courage to do so? ... Well then! The view into these dark workplaces is unobstructed here. Wait just a moment, Mr. Wanton-Curiosity and Daredevil: your eyes must first get used to this falsely shimmering light … So! Enough! Now speak! What’s going on down there? Tell me what you see, man of the most dangerous curiosity—now I am the one listening.—

—“I don’t see anything, but I hear all the more. There is a cautious malicious quiet whispering and muttering-together out of all corners and nooks. It seems to me that they are lying; a sugary mildness sticks to each sound. Weakness is to be lied into a merit, there is no doubt about it—it is just as you said.”—

—Go on!

—“and the powerlessness that does not retaliate into kindness; fearful baseness into ‘humility’; subjection to those whom one hates into ‘obedience’ (namely to one whom they say orders this subjection—they call him God). The inoffensiveness of the weak one, cowardice itself, which he possesses in abundance, his standing-at-the-door, his unavoidable having-to-wait, acquires good names here, such as ‘patience,’ it is even called virtue itself; not being able to avenge oneself is called not wanting to avenge oneself, perhaps even forgiveness (‘for they know not what they do—we alone know what they do!’). They also talk of ‘love of one’s enemies’—and sweat while doing so.”

—Go on!

—“They are miserable, there is no doubt, all of these whisperers and nook-and-cranny counterfeiters, even if they are crouching together warmly—but they tell me that their misery is a distinction and election from God, that one beats the dogs one loves the most; perhaps this misery is also a preparation, a test, a schooling, perhaps it is still more—something for which there will one day be retribution, paid out with enormous interest in gold, no! in happiness. This they call ‘blessedness’.”

—Go on!

—“Now they are giving me to understand that they are not only better than the powerful, the lords of the earth, whose saliva they must lick (not out of fear, not at all out of fear! but rather because God commands that they honor all authority)—that they are not only better, but that they are also ‘better off,’ at least will be better off one day. But enough! enough! I can’t stand it anymore. Bad air! Bad air! This workplace where they fabricate ideals—it seems to me it stinks of sheer lies.”

—No! A moment more! You haven’t said anything about the masterpiece of these artists of black magic who produce white, milk, and innocence out of every black:—haven’t you noticed what the height of their sophistication is, their boldest, finest, most ingenious, most mendacious artistic stroke? Pay attention! These cellar animals full of revenge and hate—what is it they make precisely out of this revenge and hate? Did you ever hear these words? Would you guess, if you trusted their words alone, that those around you are all humans of ressentiment? … —

“I understand, I’ll open my ears once again (oh! oh! oh! and close my nose). Now for the first time I hear what they have said so often: ‘We good ones—we are the just’—what they demand they call not retaliation but rather ‘the triumph of justice’; what they hate is not their enemy, no! they hate ‘injustice,’ ‘ungodliness’; what they believe and hope for is not the hope for revenge, the drunkenness of sweet revenge (—already Homer called it ‘sweeter than honey’), but rather the victory of God, of the just God over the ungodly; what is left on earth for them to love are not their brothers in hate but rather their ‘brothers in love,’ as they say, all the good and just on earth.

”—And what do they call that which serves them as comfort against all the sufferings of life—their phantasmagoria of the anticipated future blessedness?

—“What? Did I hear right? They call that ‘the last judgment,’ the coming of their kingdom, of the ‘kingdom of God’—meanwhile, however, they live ‘in faith,’ ‘in love,’ ‘in hope.’”

—Enough! Enough!

## Second Treatise / 3

His conscience? … One can guess in advance that the concept “conscience,” which we encounter here in its highest, almost disconcerting form, already has behind it a long history and metamorphosis. To be permitted to vouch for oneself, and with pride, hence to be permitted to say “yes” to oneself too—that is, as noted, a ripe fruit, but also a late fruit:— how long this fruit had to hang on the tree harsh and sour! And for a still much longer time one could see nothing of such a fruit,—no one could have promised it, however certainly everything on the tree was prepared and in the process of growing towards it!—“How does one make a memory for the human animal? How does one impress something onto this partly dull, partly scattered momentary understanding, this forgetfulness in the flesh, so that it remains present?” … As one can imagine, the answers and means used to solve this age-old problem were not exactly delicate; there is perhaps nothing more terrible and more uncanny in all of man’s prehistory than his mnemo-technique. “One burns something in so that it remains in one’s memory: only what does not cease to give pain remains in one’s memory”—that is a first principle from the most ancient (unfortunately also longest) psychology on earth. One might even say that everywhere on earth where there is still solemnity, seriousness, secrecy, gloomy colors in the life of man and of a people, something of that terribleness continues to be felt with which everywhere on earth one formerly promised, pledged, vowed: the past, the longest deepest hardest past, breathes on us and wells up in us when we become “serious.” Whenever man considered it necessary to make a memory for himself it was never done without blood, torment, sacrifice; the most gruesome sacrifices and pledges (to which sacrifices of firstborn belong), the most repulsive mutilations (castrations, for example), the cruelest ritual forms of all religious cults (and all religions are in their deepest foundations systems of cruelties)—all of this has its origin in that instinct that intuited in pain the most powerful aid of mnemonics. In a certain sense the entirety of asceticism belongs here: a few ideas are to be made indelible, omnipresent, unforgettable, “fixed,” for the sake of hypnotizing the entire nervous and intellectual system with these “fixed ideas”—and the ascetic procedures and forms of life are means for taking these ideas out of competition with all other ideas in order to make them “unforgettable.” The worse humanity was “at memory” the more terrible is the appearance of its practices; the harshness of penal laws in particular provides a measuring stick for the amount of effort it took to achieve victory over forgetfulness and to keep a few primitive requirements of social co-existence present for these slaves of momentary affect and desire. We Germans certainly do not regard ourselves as a particularly cruel and hard-hearted people, still less as particularly frivolous or living-for-the-day; but one need only look at our old penal codes to discover what amount of effort it takes to breed a “people of thinkers” on earth (that is to say: the people of Europe, among whom one still finds even today the maximum of confidence, seriousness, tastelessness, and matter-of-factness, qualities which give it a right to breed every type of European mandarin). Using terrible means these Germans have made a memory for themselves in order to become master over their mobbish basic instincts and the brutal heavy-handedness of the same: think of the old German punishments, for example of stoning (—even legend has the millstone on the wheel (the most characteristic invention and specialty of German genius in the realm of punishment!), casting stakes, having torn or trampled by horses (“quartering”), boiling the criminal in oil or wine (as late as the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries), the popular flaying (“Riemenschneiden”), cutting flesh from the breast; also, no doubt, that the evil-doer was smeared with honey and abandoned to the flies under a burning sun. With the help of such images and processes one finally retains in memory five, six “I will nots,” in connection with which one has given one’s promise in order to live within the advantages of society,—and truly! with the help of this kind of memory one finally came “to reason”!—Ah, reason, seriousness, mastery over the affects, this entire gloomy matter called reflection, all these prerogatives and showpieces of man: how dearly they have been paid for! how much blood and horror there is at the base of all “good things”! …

## Second Treatise / 5

Calling to mind these contract relationships admittedly awakens various kinds of suspicion and resistance toward the earlier humanity that created or permitted them, as is, after the preceding remarks, to be expected from the outset. Precisely here there are promises made; precisely here it is a matter of making a memory for the one who promises; precisely here, one may suspect, will be a place where one finds things that are hard, cruel, embarrassing. In order to instill trust in his promise of repayment, to provide a guarantee for the seriousness and the sacredness of his promise, to impress repayment on his conscience as a duty, as an obligation, the debtor—by virtue of a contract—pledges to the creditor in the case of non-payment something else that he “possesses,” over which he still has power, for example his body or his wife or his freedom or even his life (or, under certain religious conditions, even his blessedness, the salvation of his soul, finally even his peace in the grave: as in Egypt where the corpse of the debtor found no rest from the creditor, even in the grave— and indeed there was something to this rest, precisely among the Egyptians.) Above all, however, the creditor could subject the body of the debtor to all manner of ignominy and torture, for example cutting as much from it as appeared commensurate to the magnitude of the debt:— and everywhere and early on there were exact assessments of value developed from this viewpoint—some going horribly into the smallest detail— legally established assessments of the individual limbs and areas on the body. I take it already as progress, as proof of a freer, more grandly calculating, more Roman conception of the law when the Twelve Tables legislation of Rome decreed it was of no consequence how much or how little the creditors cut off in such a case, “si plus minusve secuerunt, ne fraude esto.” Let us make clear to ourselves the logic of this whole form of compensation: it is foreign enough. The equivalence consists in this: that in place of an advantage that directly makes good for the injury (hence in place of a compensation in money, land, possession of any kind) the creditor is granted a certain feeling of satisfaction as repayment and compensation,— the feeling of satisfaction that comes from being permitted to vent his power without a second thought on one who is powerless, the carnal delight “de faire le mal pour le plaisir de le faire,” the enjoyment of doing violence: which enjoyment is valued all the higher the lower and baser the creditor’s standing in the social order and can easily appear to him as a most delectable morsel, indeed as a foretaste of a higher status. Through his “punishment” of the debtor the creditor participates in a right of lords: finally he, too, for once attains the elevating feeling of being permitted to hold a being in contempt and maltreat it as something “beneath himself”—or at least, if the actual power of punishment, the execution of punishment has already passed over into the hands of the “authorities,” of seeing it held in contempt and maltreated. The compensation thus consists in a directive and right to cruelty.—

## Second Treatise / 8

... and with that clumsy consistency characteristic of earlier humanity’s thinking one arrived straightaway at the grand generalization “every thing has its price; everything can be paid off”—at the oldest and most naive moral canon of justice, at the beginning of all “good-naturedness,” all “fairness,” all “good will,” all “objectivity” on earth. Justice at this first stage is the good will among parties of approximately equal power to come to terms with one another, to reach an “understanding” again by means of a settlement—and in regard to less powerful parties, to force them to a settlement among themselves.
